Now that I've given you a
little taste of the Java
parallel streams
programming model,
and you see a little bit about
how it works under the hood,
let's spend a few
minutes talking
about how to avoid common
programming hazards when
trying to apply this
framework in practice.
And of course, the goal here
is to try to help you learn
the common mistakes
that beginners make--
like myself when I
was learning this--
so you'll hopefully
write more robust
and resilient and scalable
Java parallel streams code.
This is, essentially, an
extension and an augmentation
of some of the
earlier discussions
we had in the sequential
streams lessons,
where we talked about some of
the common programming mistakes
for sequential streams.
So of course, one of the
key issues to watch out for,
one of the key
hazards in any type
of concurrent or
parallel program,
is how to avoid the
dreaded race conditions--
which arise when an
application depends
on the sequence or the timing
of the threads in order
for it to operate properly.
And we really want to
avoid race conditions,
because they end up
corrupting the data in very
subtle and pernicious ways.
Now, the Java parallel
streams framework has
a very fundamental assumption.
It assumes that the
behaviors that you
give it to run in its
aggregate operations
don't incur race conditions.
The easiest way to
do this is simply
to avoid behaviors that
have any side effects.
So if you make sure you use
stateless lambda expressions
or method references, that's
one of the easiest ways
to avoid these problems.
You get yourself into
trouble when the results
depend on shared mutable state.
So if you have shared lambda
expressions or shared method
references, really
bad things can happen.
So let's take a look
at an example that
illustrates this problem.
I've shown this
example before, but now
that we're talking
about parallel streams,
it's probably going to
be a little bit more
meaningful for you to get a
deeper understanding of what
it's about.
So this example is actually in
the ex16 folder in my GitHub
repository, and it's the
BuggyFactorial class.
And as you'll see
here, what will happen
is we'll have state
that's not protected
by any synchronizer that gets
changed by different threads
during the parallel execution
of a stream pipeline.
And that's going to cause chaos
and insanity, not surprisingly.
So here's the method,
factorial, that's buggy.
It's incorrect.
It's incorrect not because
the logic is wrong,
but because it isn't
properly synchronized.
As you can see, we make
ourselves an instance
of a class called Total.
And as you can see,
if you look at Total,
Total is a class that has
a field called mTotal,
which is initialized to 1.
And we create one and only one
instance of this Total class.
If you take a close
look, you'll see
that the mult method
in the Total class
takes the mTotal field and
auto-multiplies it by n.
So it multiplies mTotal
by n, and then stores
the result back into mTotal.
That's what the times equal
operator does in Java.
Now, everything's fine if
this runs sequentially.
But if we put the
parallel keyword in here--
if we put the parallel call
to the function parallel,
which makes the
stream parallel--
what will happen then is there
will be a group of threads
in a pool that will run,
and those threads will all
simultaneously be calling
the mult method on the mTotal
field, which is
shared mutable state--
because obviously
it's being changed--
but it's not synchronized.
So as a result, you'll end up
with race conditions galore,
and all kinds of horrible
things will happen.
Just for kicks, try
running this program
and see what the results are.
You'll probably get
strange results that
may differ every time you run.
There's also some
other subtle issues
here with respect
to memory visibility
for trying to return the
t.mTotal field that also is not
properly locked.
But just rest assured
this code is full of bugs,
and it looks very
cool at first glance,
but it's actually really bad.
Not surprisingly, we
will come back later
and show to fix this code
by using other features
like Java terminal operations
such as collect, which
works properly for this case.
Another problem-- which
I've also outlined before
in the context of
sequential streams,
but becomes even more
problematic in the context
of parallel streams--
is so-called interference
with the data source.
And this occurs when
the source of a stream
is modified within the pipeline.
So the real key thing here is
don't change your data sources
while they're being
worked upon by a stream--
either a sequential stream
or a parallel stream.
This example goes ahead and
creates a list of 10 integers
with the values 0 through 9.
And you can see
this is just ever
so different from
the one I showed
before when we talked
about common problems
with sequential streams.
What we do here is we make
an IntStream of the values 0
through 9.
We box those primitive
ints into integers,
which are reference types.
And then we collect them using
the toCollection factor method
from the collectors
utility class,
passing in the
ArrayList constructor
reference, which will allocate
the list using an array list.
So now we have an array list
of 0 through 9 integers.
So far so good.
Here's where the chaos
and insanity breaks out.
So what we do now is we
create a parallel stream,
and we call peek--
which is, I think
I've mentioned before,
is really just a debugging aid.
It's supposed to log something,
or look at the values.
It's not supposed to do
anything with side effects.
But just to cause problems, we
pass in the list::remove method
reference--
which, of course, will be
removing elements from the list
as we're iterating
through them in parallel
and trying to print them out.
And so really bad
things will happen.
You'll probably get exceptions.
You'll get weird results.
So the bottom line is do not
use code, do not write code,
that has interference
with the data
source for either sequential
or parallel streams.
If you have behaviors that
don't have shared state
and don't have any side
effects other than just simply
returning a result,
these are what
you want to use for
parallel streams,
because they require no
explicit synchronization.
You can just run them.
The parallel streams framework
lets them run in parallel.
They're effectively
embarrassingly
parallel computations
with no dependencies,
no need to communicate
with anything else.
And that's really what
the streams framework
would prefer that you do.
Here are some examples.
We've seen some of
these from before.
For example, the
searchForPhrase method
that we talked about
when we discussed
our sequential search
streams example
goes ahead and uses this
PhraseMatchSpliterator.
As you can see, there's
really no side effects here.
It just goes ahead
and returns an object
of type SearchResults, so
that's all nice and pure.
Likewise, the isEmpty
method from SearchResults
just checks to see if the
size of the list is 0.
That's also pure.
So these are things
that we don't
have to worry about
being buggy, having
concurrency hazards,
parallelism hazards, race
conditions, and so on.
If you need to access an
update shared mutable state
in a parallel stream--
which sometimes does happen.
For example, let's say you
have some kind of a cache--
like a cache for
images, for instance.
Make sure that it's
properly synchronized.
So here we might
have an image cache
that's used to cache the
content of downloaded images
that are downloaded
from remote servers.
And probably the
best way to do this
to protect that cached data in
the face of multiple threads
running in parallel is simply
to use a concurrent hash map--
which is a concurrent
collection that comes out
of the Java collections
framework which
is really well-designed and
optimized to work effectively
for multiple access from threads
both reading and writing to it.
As you can see, one of the
things that makes it efficient
is it has a bunch
of different locks
so you don't end up with
single points of contention,
and it's also very
carefully designed
to allow multiple reaccesses
to all [? go in ?] parallel.
And even if you
do write accesses,
if you don't end up
writing to the same bucket
where something
else is writing to,
once again, there's no
contention for the locks.
So it's super fast, super
optimized, super scalable,
and a great way to
protect your data
without having to do the
synchronization yourself
in your own code.
And of course, if
you really do have
to synchronize data
structures in your own code
in a parallel stream,
make sure that you
use the appropriate
synchronizers that we've
covered in other courses,
such as my concurrent
object-oriented programming
course, which will teach you
how to use synchronizers
like reentrant locks
or monitor locks, and so on.